.TH CMDIPC 1 CMDIPC
.SH NAME
cmdipc - System V and POSIX IPC from the command line
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cmdipc
\-Q
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ [receive]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-Q
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ send
[\-\-]
.I MESSAGE
.br
.B cmdipc
\-S
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ [p|v|z|read]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-S
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ set
.I VALUE
.br
.B cmdipc
\-M
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ [read]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-M
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ write
[\-\-]
.I DATA
.br
.B cmdipc
\-X
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ [enter|leave]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-C
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ [enter|leave|wait]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-C
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ notify
[all]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-C
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ broadcast
.br
.B cmdipc
\-B
.RI [ OPTION ]...\  THRESHOLD
[enter]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-B
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ --remove
.br
.B cmdipc
\-L
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ [shared\ [un]lock]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-L
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ exclusive\ [un]lock
.br
.B cmdipc
\-R
.RI [ OPTION ]...\ [\-\-]
.RI [ MESSAGE ]
.br
.B cmdipc
\-\-ftok
.I PATH
.I ID
.SH DESCRIPTION
System V and POSIX interprocess communication from the command
line. In addition to the primities shared memory, message queue
and semaphores, this tool can from these primitives construct
mutexes, conditions, barriers, shared locks and rendezvous.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ,\  \-\-help
Prints this help message and exits.
.TP
.BR \-k ,\  \-\-key \ \fIKEY\fP
The key (SysV) or name (POSIX) of the item.
.TP
.BR \-m ,\  \-\-mode \ \fIOCTAL\fP
The mode for the item.
.TP
.BR \-s ,\  \-\-size \ \fISIZE\fP
Maximum size for messages.
.TP
.BR \-z ,\  \-\-spool \ \fISIZE\fP
Maximum number of messages.
.TP
.BR \-t ,\  \-\-type \ \fITYPE\fP
Message type.
.TP
.BR \-p ,\  \-\-priority \ \fIPRIO\fP
Message priority.
.TP
.BR \-d ,\  \-\-delta \ \fIDELTA\fP
Semaphore value increment.
.TP
.BR \-i ,\  \-\-initial \ \fIVALUE\fP
Initial semaphore value.
.TP
.BR \-b ,\  \-\-timeout \ \fISECS\fP
Semaphore V/Z timeout, in seconds.
.TP
.BR \-l ,\  \-\-length \ \fILEN\fP
Shared memory read length.
.TP
.BR \-o ,\  \-\-offset \ \fIOFF\fP
Shared memory read/write offset.
.TP
.BR \-r ,\  \-\-remove
Remove unit.
.TP
.BR \-n ,\  \-\-nonblocking
Do not block, exit with 2 if busy.
.TP
.BR \-c ,\  \-\-create
Create item.
.TP
.BR \-x ,\  \-\-exclusive
Create exclusive item.
.TP
.BR \-f ,\  \-\-ftok
Create unit ID, possibly non-unique.
.TP
.BR \-P ,\  \-\-posix
Use POSIX IPC rather than System V IPC.
.TP
.BR \-Q ,\  \-\-mqueue
Use message queue.
.TP
.BR \-S ,\  \-\-semaphore
Use semaphore.
.TP
.BR \-M ,\  \-\-shm
Use shared memory.
.TP
.BR \-X ,\  \-\-mutex
Use mutex.
.TP
.BR \-C ,\  \-\-condition
Use condition.
.TP
.BR \-B ,\  \-\-barrier
Use barrier.
.TP
.BR \-L ,\  \-\-shared-lock
Use shared lock.
.TP
.BR \-R ,\  \-\-rendezvous
Use rendezvous.
.SH RATIONALE
Interprocess communication in the command line enables much
more interesting use of shell scripts.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR bus (1),
.BR ipcs (1),
.BR ipcrm (1),
.BR ipcmk (1),
.BR flock (1),
.BR mkfifo (1),
.BR ipcmd
.PP
Full documentation available locally via: info \(aq(cmdipc)\(aq
.SH AUTHORS
Principal author, Mattias Andrée.  See the COPYING file for the full
list of authors.
.SH LICENSE
Copyright \(co 2014, 2015  Mattias Andrée
.br
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.br
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to m@maandree.se
